Approach to the Patient with Disease of the Respiratory System

The majority of diseases of the respiratory system present with cough and/or dyspnea and fall into one of three major categories: (1) obstructive; (2) restrictive; and (3) vascular diseases. Obstructive
pathophysiology is most common and primarily results from airway diseases, such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), bronchiectasis, and bronchiolitis. Diseases resulting in restrictive pathophysiology include parenchymal lung diseases, abnormalities of the chest wall and pleura, and neuromuscular disease. Pulmonary embolism, pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonary venoocclusive disease are examples of disorders of the pulmonary vasculature. Although many specific diseases fall into these major categories, both infective and neoplastic processes can affect the respiratory system and result in myriad pathologic findings, including those listed in the three categories above.

Disorders can also be grouped according to gas exchange abnormalities, including hypoxemia, hypercarbia, or combined impairment; however, many respiratory disorders do not manifest as gas exchange abnormalities. As with the evaluation of most patients, the approach to a patient with a respiratory system disorder begins with a thorough history and a focused physical examination. Many patients will subsequently undergo pulmonary function testing, chest imaging, blood and sputum analysis, a variety of serologic or microbiologic studies, and diagnostic procedures, such as bronchoscopy. This stepwise approach is discussed in detail below.

■ HISTORY
Dyspnea and Cough The cardinal symptoms of respiratory disease are dyspnea and cough (Chaps. 37 and 38). Dyspnea has many causes, some of which are not predominantly due to lung pathology. The words a patient uses to describe shortness of breath can suggest certain etiologies for dyspnea. Patients with obstructive lung disease often complain of “chest tightness” or “inability to get a deep breath,” whereas patients with congestive heart failure more commonly report “air hunger” or a sense of suffocation. The tempo of onset and the duration of a patient’s dyspnea are likewise helpful in determining the etiology. Acute shortness of breath is usually associated with sudden physiologic changes, such as acute airway narrowing (e.g., laryngeal edema, bronchospasm, or mucus plugging), acute hypoxemia (e.g., pulmonary edema, pneumonia, or pulmonary embolism), or sudden changes in the work of breathing (e.g., pneumothorax). Patients with COPD and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) experience a gradual progression of dyspnea on exertion, punctuated by acute exacerbations of shortness of breath. In contrast, most asthmatics do not have daily symptoms, but experience intermittent episodes of dyspnea, cough, and chest tightness that are usually associated with specific triggers, such as an upper respiratory tract infection or exposure to allergens. Specific questioning should focus on factors that incite dyspnea as well as on any intervention that helps resolve the patient’s shortness of breath. Asthma is commonly exacerbated by specific triggers, although this can also be true of COPD. Many patients with lung disease report dyspnea on exertion. Determining the degree of activity that results in shortness of breath gives the clinician a gauge of the patient’s degree of disability. Many patients adapt their level of activity to accommodate progressive limitation. For this reason, it is important, particularly in older patients, to delineate the activities in which they engage and how these activities have changed over time. Dyspnea on exertion is often an early symptom of underlying lung or heart disease and warrants a thorough evaluation.  For cough, the clinician should inquire about the duration of the cough, whether or not it is associated with sputum production, and any specific triggers that induce it. Acute cough productive of phlegm is often a symptom of infection of the respiratory system, including processes affecting the upper airway (e.g., sinusitis, tracheitis), the lower airways (e.g., bronchitis, bronchiectasis), and the lung parenchyma (e.g., pneumonia). Both the quantity and quality of the sputum, including whether it is blood-streaked or frankly bloody, should be determined. Hemoptysis warrants urgent evaluation as delineated in Chap. 39.
Chronic cough (defined as that persisting for >8 weeks) is commonly associated with obstructive lung diseases, particularly asthma, COPD, and chronic bronchiectasis, as well as “nonrespiratory” diseases, such as gastroesophageal reflux and postnasal drip. Diffuse parenchymal lung diseases, including IPF, frequently present as a persistent, nonproductive cough. All causes of cough are not respiratory in origin, and assessment should encompass a broad differential, including cardiac and gastrointestinal diseases as well as psychogenic causes. Additional Symptoms Patients with respiratory disease may report wheezing, which is suggestive of airways disease, particularly asthma. Hemoptysis can be a symptom of a variety of lung diseases, including infections of the respiratory tract, bronchogenic carcinoma, and pulmonary embolism. In addition, chest pain or discomfort can be respiratory in origin. As the lung parenchyma is not innervated with pain fibers, pain in the chest from respiratory disorders usually results from either diseases of the parietal pleura (e.g., pneumothorax) or pulmonary vascular diseases (e.g., pulmonary hypertension). As many diseases of the lung can result in strain on the right side of the heart, patients may also present with symptoms of cor pulmonale, including abdominal bloating or distention and
pedal edema (Chap. 257). Additional History A thorough social history is an essential component of the evaluation of patients with respiratory disease. All patients should be asked about current or previous cigarette smoking, as this exposure is associated with many diseases of the respiratory system, including COPD, bronchogenic lung cancer, and select parenchymal lung diseases (e.g., desquamative interstitial pneumonitis and pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis). For most of these disorders, increased cigarette smoke exposure (i.e., cigarette pack-years) increases the risk of disease. E-cigarette or vaping use can lead to acute or subacute lung injury (i.e., E-cigarette or vaping use-associated lung injury [EVALI]). Secondhand smoke also increases risk for some respiratory disorders, so patients should also be asked about parents, spouses, or housemates who smoke. Possible inhalational exposures at work (e.g., asbestos, silica) or home (e.g., wood smoke, excrement from pet birds) should be explored (Chap. 289). Travel predisposes to certain infections of the respiratory tract, most notably tuberculosis. Potential exposure to fungi is increased in specific geographic regions or climates (e.g., Histoplasma capsulatum), so exposures to these regions should be determined. Associated symptoms of fever and chills should raise the
suspicion of infective etiologies, both pulmonary and systemic. A comprehensive review of systems may suggest rheumatologic or autoimmune disease presenting with respiratory tract manifestations. Questions should focus on joint pain or swelling, rashes, dry eyes, dry mouth, or constitutional symptoms. In addition, carcinomas from a variety of primary sources commonly metastasize to the lung and cause respiratory symptoms. Finally, therapy for other conditions, including both irradiation and medications, can result in diseases of the chest. Physical Examination The clinician’s suspicion of respiratory disease often begins with the patient’s vital signs. The respiratory rate is informative, whether elevated (tachypnea) or depressed (hypopnea). In addition, pulse oximetry should be measured, as many patients with respiratory disease have hypoxemia, either at rest or with exertion. The first step of the physical examination is inspection. Patients with respiratory disease may be in distress and using accessory muscles of respiration to breathe. Severe kyphoscoliosis can result in restrictive pathophysiology. Inability to complete a sentence in conversation is generally a sign of severe impairment and should
result in an expedited evaluation of the patient. Percussion of the chest is used to establish diaphragm excursion
and lung size. In the setting of decreased breath sounds, percussion is used to distinguish between pleural effusions (dull to percussion) and pneumothorax (hyper-resonant note). The role of palpation is limited in the respiratory examination. Palpation can demonstrate subcutaneous air in the setting of barotrauma. It can also be used as an adjunctive assessment to determine whether an area of decreased breath sounds is due to consolidation (increased tactile fremitus) or a pleural effusion (decreased tactile fremitus). To detect unilateral disorders of ventilation, the symmetry and degree of chest wall expansion can be assessed during a deep inspiration by placing one’s thumbs together at the midline over the lower posterior chest while grasping the lateral rib cage. The majority of the manifestations of respiratory disease present as abnormalities of auscultation. Wheezes are a manifestation of airway obstruction. While most commonly a sign of asthma, peribronchial edema in the setting of congestive heart failure can also result in diffuse wheezes, as can any other process that causes narrowing of small airways. Wheezes can be polyphonic, involving multiple different size airways (e.g., asthma), or monophonic, involving one size airway (e.g., bronchogenic carcinoma). For these reasons, clinicians must take care not to attribute all wheezing to
asthma. Rhonchi are a manifestation of obstruction of medium-sized airways, most often with secretions. In the acute setting, this manifestation may be a sign of viral or bacterial bronchitis. Chronic rhonchi suggest bronchiectasis or COPD. In contrast to expiratory wheezes and rhonchi, stridor is a high-pitched, focal inspiratory wheeze, usually heard over the neck as a manifestation of upper airway obstruction.
Crackles, or rales, are commonly a sign of alveolar disease. Processes that fill the alveoli with fluid may result in crackles, including pulmonary edema and pneumonia. Crackles in pulmonary edema are generally more prominent at the bases. Interestingly, diseases that result in fibrosis of the interstitium (e.g., IPF) also result in crackles that sound like Velcro being ripped apart. Although some clinicians make a distinction between “wet” and “dry” crackles, this distinction has not been shown to be a reliable way to differentiate among etiologies of respiratory disease. One way to help distinguish between crackles associated with alveolar fluid and those associated with interstitial fibrosis is to assess for egophony. Egophony is the auscultation of the sound “AH” instead of “EEE” when a patient phonates “EEE.” This change in note is due to abnormal sound transmission through consolidated parenchyma and is present in pneumonia but not in IPF. Similarly, areas of alveolar filling have increased whispered pectoriloquy as well as transmission of larger-airway sounds (i.e., bronchial breath sounds in a lung zone where vesicular breath sounds are expected). The lack or diminution of breath sounds can also help determine the etiology of respiratory disease. Patients with emphysema often have a quiet chest with diffusely decreased breath sounds. A pneumothorax or pleural effusion may present with an area of absent breath sounds. Other Systems Pedal edema, if symmetric, may suggest cor pulmonale; if asymmetric, it may be due to deep venous thrombosis and associated pulmonary embolism. Jugular venous distention may also be a sign of volume overload associated with right heart failure.
Pulsus paradoxus is an ominous sign in a patient with obstructive lung disease, as it is associated with significant negative intrathoracic (pleural) pressures required for ventilation and impending respiratory failure. As stated earlier, rheumatologic disease may manifest primarily as lung disease. Owing to this association, particular attention should be paid to joint and skin examination. Clubbing can be found in many lung diseases, including cystic fibrosis, IPF, and lung cancer. Cyanosis is seen in hypoxemic respiratory disorders that result in >5 g of deoxygenated hemoglobin/dL.

■ DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
The sequence of studies is dictated by the clinician’s differential diagnosis, as determined by the history and physical examination. Acute respiratory symptoms are often evaluated with multiple tests performed at the same time in order to diagnose any life-threatening diseases rapidly (e.g., pulmonary embolism or multilobar pneumonia). In contrast, chronic dyspnea and cough can be evaluated in a more protracted, stepwise fashion. Pulmonary Function Testing (See also Chap. 286) The initial pulmonary function test obtained is spirometry. This study is an effort-dependent test used to assess for obstructive pathophysiology as seen in asthma, COPD, and bronchiectasis (Table 284-1). A diminished-forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) (often defined as <70%) is diagnostic of airflow obstruction. In addition to measuring FEV1 and FVC, the clinician should examine the flow-volume loop (which is less effortdependent). A plateau of the inspiratory and expiratory curves suggests large-airway obstruction in extrathoracic and intrathoracic locations, respectively. Spirometry with symmetric decreases in FEV1 and FVC warrants further testing, including measurement of lung volumes and the diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). A total lung capacity <80% of the patient’s predicted value defines restrictive pathophysiology. Restriction can result from parenchymal disease, neuromuscular weakness, or chest wall or pleural diseases (Table 284-1). Restriction with impaired gas exchange, as indicated by a decreased DLCO, suggests parenchymal lung disease. Additional testing, such as measurements of maximal inspiratory and expiratory pressures, can help diagnose neuromuscular weakness. Normal spirometry, normal lung volumes, and a low DLCO should prompt further evaluation for pulmonary vascular disease. Arterial blood gas testing is often helpful in assessing respiratory disease. Hypoxemia, while usually apparent with pulse oximetry, can be further evaluated with the measurement of arterial PO2 and the calculation of an alveolar gas and arterial blood oxygen tension difference DO2. Patients with diseases that cause ventilation-perfusion mismatch or shunt physiology have an increased DO2 at rest. Arterial blood gas testing also allows the measurement of arterial PCO2. Hypercarbia can accompany disorders of ventilation, as seen in severe airway obstruction (e.g.,COPD) or progressive restrictive physiology. Chest Imaging (See Chap. A12) Most patients with disease of the respiratory system undergo imaging of the chest as part of the initial evaluation. Clinicians should generally begin with ultrasound of the chest or a plain chest radiograph, preferably posterior-anterior and lateral films. Ultrasound is often readily available and can help rapidly diagnose pneumothorax, pleural effusion, and consolidation of lung parenchyma. Chest radiographs give additional detail and can reveal findings including opacities of the parenchyma, blunting of the costophrenic angles, mass lesions, and volume loss. Of note, many diseases of the respiratory system, particularly those of the airways and pulmonary vasculature, are associated with a normal chest radiograph. CT scan of the chest can also be useful to delineate parenchymal processes, pleural disease, masses or nodules, and large airways. If the test includes administration of intravenous contrast, the pulmonary vasculature can be assessed with particular utility for determination of pulmonary emboli. Intravenous contrast also allows lymph nodes to be examined in greater detail. When coupled with positron emission tomography (PET), lesions of the chest can be assessed for metabolic activity, helping differentiate between malignancy and scar.
