Diagnostic Procedures in Respiratory Disease

Diagnostic procedures in respiratory disease encompass a wide array of invasive and noninvasive modalities. Methods for acquiring diagnostic specimens are described in this chapter, as are the various imaging modalities at hand. Pulmonary function tests and measurements of gas exchange are described in Chap. 284.

BEDSIDE PLEURAL PROCEDURES
■ THORACENTESIS
Thoracentesis, also known as pleurocentesis, refers to percutaneous aspiration of fluid from the pleural space. The right and left pleural
spaces do not normally communicate with each other, and either can
be directly accessed between the thoracic ribs. The current standard
of care entails using point-of-care ultrasonography to mark the site of
needle puncture; this reduces the risks of “dry tap” as well as
complications such as pneumothorax. Beside palliation of symptoms
associated with pleural effusion (most commonly dyspnea),
thoracentesis may be performed for diagnostic purposes. The range
of hematologic, biochemical, microbiologic, and cytologic pleural fluid
studies has largely remained unchanged over the past few decades,
as has the widespread adoption of Light’s criteria for distinguishing
exudates from transudates that were described in 1972. However,
newer assays such as mesothelin-1 testing for neoplastic diseases
(chiefly mesothelioma) have also become available more recently.
More details on pleural fluid testing are described in Chap. 294.
■ CLOSED PLEURAL BIOPSY
Closed pleural biopsy involves percutaneous sampling of the parietal
pleural lining. This procedure can be performed either “blindly”
(typically with an Abrams needle) or by using imaging guidance such
as CT or ultrasound. Closed pleural biopsy without ultrasound
guidance is highly sensitive for pleural tuberculosis, owing to the
diffuse pleural involvement that is typically seen in those cases.
Image-guided closed pleural biopsy is most helpful in case of
focal pleural abnormalities such as pleural nodules, which are
virtually pathognomonic of malignant involvement. Limited studies
have shown high diagnostic yields of around 80–90% with this
modality, but patient selection is key as the diagnostic performance
may be considerably lower in the absence of a specific pleural
abnormality that could be visualized. Between CT and ultrasound
imaging, only ultrasound is typically performed in real-time during the
act of obtaining the biopsy.

THORACIC SURGICAL PROCEDURES
■ THORACOSCOPY AND THORACOTOMY
Thoracoscopy and thoracotomy encompass a spectrum of surgical
procedures that involve accessing and operating within the pleural
space, either via one or more small entry ports using thoracoscopic
tools or via larger incisions as in thoracotomy (Fig. 286-1).
Thoracoscopy varies in its scope considerably. An interventional
pulmonologist typically performs a pleuroscopy (also known as
medical thoracoscopy) and accesses the pleural space through a
single port for parietal pleural biopsy or for limited therapeutic
purposes such as minor lysis of adhesions, thoracoscopic
pleurodesis, or indwelling pleural catheter placement. This procedure
can usually be performed safely under conscious sedation. On the
other hand, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) and
robotic-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (RATS) represent more
invasive procedures but with more controlled environments entailing
general anesthesia with single-lung ventilation, creation of multiple
entry ports, and several additional diagnostic and therapeutic
possibilities including, but not limited to, lung biopsy, lymph node
sampling, lobectomy, decortication, and creation of a pericardial
window. Open thoracotomy uses wider incisions and more
conventional surgical techniques for performing all of the above as
well as additional tasks such as creation of a Clagett window for
chronic bronchopleural fistula with empyema.

■ MEDIASTINOSCOPY AND MEDIASTINOTOMY
Surgical access to the mediastinum, either through a small port
(mediastinoscopy) or a wider incision (mediastinotomy), enables
diagnostic sampling of mediastinal structures such as mediastinal
lymph nodes as part of lung cancer staging. With the advent of
endoscopic needle-based techniques (see below), surgery is no
longer considered the first-line option for diagnostic lymph node
sampling but is recommended in cases of negative needle-based
sampling where suspicion for malignant nodal involvement remains
sufficiently high.

BRONCHOSCOPY
Bronchoscopy, which entails passing a tube with a lighted camera
inside the lower respiratory tract, includes flexible and rigid
bronchoscopy (termed after the physical properties of each
bronchoscope). Flexible bronchoscopy is by far the more commonly
used form and enables access to more distal parts of the respiratory
tract. The rigid bronchoscope, although limited to the central airways,
has the added advantage of providing a secure airway for ventilation;
artificial breaths can then be administered through the scope itself as
part of a closed circuit or through open jet ventilation. The rigid
bronchoscope also provides a conduit for diagnostic or therapeutic
instruments to be passed freely, rather than through the relatively
constrained working channel of a flexible bronchoscope. When
bronchoscopy is limited to diagnostic indications, the rigid
bronchoscope is seldom used except on occasion as a
precautionary measure for anticipated severe bleeding where having
a more secure airway might be particularly advantageous (e.g., in
transbronchial cryobiopsy). Different types of diagnostic
bronchoscopic procedures are described below.

Bronchoalveolar Lavage 
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) is the gold
standard method for obtaining respiratory secretions for hematologic,
biochemical, microbiological, and/or cytologic analyses. It avoids the
risk of salivary contamination, which may be seen in a sputum
specimen, and is particularly useful when sputum cannot be
obtained or when sampling of a specific pulmonary lobe or segment
is desired. After wedging the bronchoscope in a distal airway in order
to prevent fluid escape around the scope, sterile saline or distilled
water is instilled through the scope’s working channel (typically in
one to three aliquots of approximately 50 mL each). Immediately
thereafter, suction is applied to aspirate as much of the fluid as
possible. This allows sampling of distal airways and lung
parenchyma—areas not directly viewable or accessible. If there is
concern for alveolar hemorrhage, serial BALs from the same site
may show rising red blood cell counts and even visibly bloodier
returns with subsequent lavages.

Brushing and Endobronchial Biopsy
Bronchoscopic brushing is a minimally invasive sampling technique that can be used to sample
the mucosal biofilm for microbiologic analyses as well as the
bronchial epithelial layer for cytologic analyses. Endobronchial
biopsy allows sampling of abnormal bronchial mucosa and
submucosa for histopathologic analysis (as may be indicated in
cases of endobronchial amyloidosis or sarcoidosis, for example).
Among cigarette smokers with one or more lung nodules and a
nondiagnostic bronchoscopy, bronchial brushings can be used with a
commercially available classifier that estimates lung cancer
probability based on a gene expression signature. Patients with
intermediate pretest probability who end up with low posttest
probability can more confidently opt for imaging surveillance, thus
avoiding further invasive testing and related complications.

Transbronchial Biopsy Including Cryobiopsy 
Transbronchial biopsy involves removing a piece of alveolated lung tissue by
passing a sampling tool into the alveolar space. The most commonly
employed biopsy tool is flexible forceps, typically 2.0 mm or 2.8 mm
in caliber. When a specific pulmonary lesion such as a lung nodule is
being biopsied, various imaging and navigation tools (described
below) may be used to help guide the site of forceps biopsy. When
random sampling of the lung parenchyma is desired, e.g., to assess
for posttransplant lung rejection, either fluoroscopic guidance or
tactile feedback is commonly used to position the forceps in the
subpleural lung parenchyma. Limited data point to three biopsy
samples being adequate for optimizing sensitivity in case of
malignant lung nodules. On the other hand, at least five distinct
pieces of alveolated lung tissue are needed for formal diagnosis of
acute cellular rejection among lung transplant recipients per current
recommendations. An increasingly popular biopsy tool is the
cryoprobe, a flexible catheter with a blunt tip that delivers liquid
nitrogen or carbon dioxide over a few seconds to freeze a portion of
lung parenchyma and make it adhere to the probe itself. Before the
tissue can thaw and detach, the probe is pulled back (typically along
with the bronchoscope itself), and a frozen piece of lung tissue is
removed alongside. Cryobiopsy has a higher diagnostic yield than
forceps biopsy for diffuse parenchymal illnesses such as idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis but comes with a higher risk of major bleeding
and pneumothorax.

Transbronchial Needle Aspiration 
Transbronchial needle aspiration (TBNA) involves using a hollow-bore needle for obtaining
aspirated specimens. This may be accompanied by suction or simply
rely on capillary action, with data not pointing to suction impacting
diagnostic sensitivity. TBNA has diagnostic sensitivity superior to that
of transbronchial biopsy for malignant peripheral nodules. This
makes intuitive sense given that the lesion may lie extraluminally and
require traversing the airway wall, which only the needle may be able
to accomplish. Furthermore, combining TBNA with conventional
transbronchial biopsy appears to increase pooled diagnostic
sensitivity.

Endobronchial Ultrasound-Guided Transbronchial Needle Aspiration 
Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) and EBUS-guided
transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) represent a major
advance in diagnostic bronchoscopy over the turn of the twentieth
century, largely replacing surgical methods for lymph node sampling.
EBUS-TBNA involves using a specialized flexible bronchoscope that
simultaneously operates a video camera and a convex ultrasound
probe (which is installed at its distal end). Under real-time
ultrasonographic visualization, the aspiration needle is inserted
through the airway wall into the mediastinal target and the aspirate is
sent for microbiologic or cytologic analyses as indicated (Fig. 286-2).
Newer variants of this technique involve the use of core needles or
mini-forceps, providing tissue specimens rather than aspirates that
can be sent for histopathologic analysis. EBUS-TBNA has a
sensitivity of approximately 90% for epithelial malignancies and
approximately 70% for lymphoma (higher for detecting cases of
lymphoma recurrence than for de novo lymphoma). For sarcoidosis,
estimates point to a sensitivity of at least 80% (higher if combined
with endobronchial and transbronchial biopsies). EBUS-TBNA has
been shown to provide adequate amounts of material to provide
ancillary testing in cases of malignancy, such as immunostaining or
genetic testing. A related needle-based technique, also using
ultrasound guidance, involves sampling mediastinal structures
through the esophagus, which can be a useful adjunct to EBUSTBNA as it may provide better access to certain mediastinal lymphnode stations. The combined sensitivity of these two techniques is
slightly higher compared to either one alone. Esophageal sampling
can be accomplished either by inserting the same EBUS
bronchoscope through the esophagus or by using the standard
endoscope used by gastroenterologists for endoscopic ultrasound
(EUS).


At many centers, EBUS-TBNA is accompanied by rapid on-site
cytologic evaluation (ROSE), wherein a portion of the aspirated
specimen is immediately examined by a cytotechnologist or
pathologist using rapid staining. This rapid assessment, while often
inadequate for a definitive final diagnosis, can be helpful in
establishing adequacy of sampled material by providing the
bronchoscopist with real-time feedback on whether additional
sampling is advisable.

The optimal way to process samples obtained via EBUS-TBNA is
unknown. Some centers practice the tissue coagulum clot method, in
which multiple aspirates are emptied onto a single piece of filter
paper to form a clot that can help with preparation of a cell block.
Other centers simply use the residue from spun specimens for this
purpose. There is no conclusive evidence that one technique is
superior to the other, but this question has not been well studied to
date.

Guided Peripheral Bronchoscopy 
Guided peripheral bronchoscopy involves the use of advanced tools to aid with one or
more of three tasks involved in successful bronchoscopic sampling
of peripherally located lesions, such as lung nodules (see below).
Various tools are available to help the bronchoscopist accomplish
these tasks (Fig. 286-3).


(A) Navigating to the appropriate lobe/segment/subsegment:
Electromagnetic navigational bronchoscopy (which involves
GPS-like feedback as the bronchoscope is advanced toward the
target) and virtual bronchoscopy (which overlays live endoscopic
images onto a CT-derived virtual bronchoscopic map) can help
with successful navigation through the airways. Shape-sensing
technology, used as part of one robotic bronchoscopy platform
(see below), also aims to achieve the same purpose.
(B) The aforementioned technologies can also help localize a lesion,
although they are limited by relying on previously acquired CT
images that may or may not accurately represent precisely where
the lesion is currently located in a three-dimensional space.
Radial EBUS uses a thin ultrasound-tipped catheter that can be
passed through the bronchoscope’s working channel all the way
to the lung periphery. This provides real-time images of
structures beyond airway walls. A concentric image of the target,
indicating a lesion with the airway going through its center, is
associated with a high diagnostic yield. Alternatively, fluoroscopic
imaging can be used to recalibrate the precise target location on
navigational bronchoscopic platforms, potentially improving
localization as well. Cone-beam CT, which is a distilled version of
CT imaging that has been used intra-procedurally in multiple
other fields such as interventional radiology, can be used for
confirmation of optimal tool-in-lesion (with the patient undergoing
a breath hold) prior to sampling.
(C) The tools available for peripheral sampling include biopsy
forceps, brushes, and aspiration needles as described above,
with TBNA having the highest diagnostic sensitivity for discrete
malignant lesions. Evidence for use of cryobiopsy for sampling
discrete lesions in the lung periphery is currently limited. Recent
innovations also include steerable sampling tools, which hold
promise for more optimal sampling of the target lesion.

Robotic Bronchoscopy 
In 2018, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved two robotic bronchoscopy platforms
for commercial use. These platforms offer improved bronchoscope
stability and reach, but whether navigation, target localization, and
adequacy of sampling are superior to other techniques is less
certain. Early data on diagnostic yields are encouraging, but
multicenter prospective data are not yet available.

MEDICAL IMAGING
Imaging has revolutionized the practice of medicine. Technologies
such as x-ray, CT, MRI, and positron emission tomography (PET)
can provide noninvasive assessments of alveolar perfusion, the
metabolic activity of a lung nodule, the bronchovascular source of
hemoptysis, or the earliest disease-related changes in parenchymal
structure. Given the breadth of advances in respiratory system
imaging and increasingly specialized applications across diseases,
the following section is organized by technology. The final part of this
section is dedicated to deep learning and the role it is increasingly
playing in medical image interpretation.

■ CHEST X-RAY
The field of medical imaging can be traced back to work done by
Wilhelm Roentgen in the 1890s. Roentgen noted that after
connecting a cathode ray tube to a power supply, material in his lab
would fluoresce even if the emission of visible light from the tube
was blocked. He quickly deduced the presence of additional invisible
“x-rays” and subsequently observed that their passage through solid
material was attenuated in proportion to the material’s density. Within
weeks of its discovery, x-ray technology was being widely leveraged
to guide surgical exploration and the extraction of foreign objects
such as shrapnel from the battlefield. Chest x-ray (CXR) has since
become the foundation of clinical practice for respiratory medicine
and is a widely available technology even in resource-limited
settings.
The most commonly used CXR images for respiratory medicine
are the posteroanterior (PA) and lateral films in the outpatient setting
and anteroposterior (AP) films for those studies obtained at the
bedside. These are 2-dimensional representations of 3-dimensional
structures and the differing views can be used to examine
superimposed structures (for example, a parenchymal opacity in the
retrocardiac space). The contours of the chest wall, the silhouette of
the heart, great vessels, and mediastinum, as well as the
appearance of the parenchyma and bronchovascular bundle are all
used to detect and classify disease as well as monitor its
progression or response to therapeutic intervention. An example of a
normal PA and lateral CXR is provided in Fig. 286-4.

In this image of the normal lung, many of the smaller structures
such as the lymphatics and distal airways are beyond the ability of
conventional x-ray technology to resolve. Larger structures such as
the pulmonary vasculature may also be indistinct because of body
position and the redistribution of blood flow to more gravitationally
dependent regions. Diseases involving these structures may
enhance or obscure their appearance. An example of these diseases
is congestive heart failure where the lymphatics become engorged
(Kerley B lines), the nondependent vasculature more prominent
(cephalization), and the outer boundaries of the bronchial walls
blurred (bronchial cuffing). Each of these findings must be clinically
contextualized and while a thickened interstitium may be due to
hydrostatic pulmonary edema, it may also be indicative of interstitial
lung disease or carcinomatosis. CXR can also be used to
discriminate pulmonary and extra-pulmonary disease and because
of that it is an excellent initial diagnostic for nonspecific symptoms.
An elevated hemidiaphragm, fibrosis of the mediastinum, or
hyperlucency of the lung parenchyma all reflect processes that
cause dyspnea, but their treatment and prognosis differ markedly.

■ COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CT was introduced to clinical care in the 1980s and quickly became
one of the most heavily leveraged modalities for medical imaging.
While CXR provides one or two views of the thorax from which an
experienced clinician must disambiguate overlying structures, CT
provides spatially resolved reconstructions of all structures in the
thorax. The acquisition of a CT scan involves the same basic
process as an x-ray with a patient placed between a source of
photons and a detector, but the image reconstruction and advanced
analytics that can be applied to those images differ markedly. The
passage of photons through the body is impeded in proportion to
tissue density. This absorption or attenuation of photon passage is
measured in Hounsfield units (HU) and clinical CT scanners are
regularly calibrated to a standard scale with water having an HU of 0
and air –1000 HU. The broad range of tissue densities (reflected as
attenuation values) in the thorax and the limited human ability to
visually discriminate between two structures of similar densities are
addressed by modifying the image display. A window width and level
(the range and center of the range of HU values to display) is
selected to optimize viewing structures of interest. For example, lung
windows are optimized for visual inspection of the low-density lung
parenchyma and all of the surrounding higher-density structures
appear white, whereas the mediastinal windows are optimized to
view the higher-density structures and anything of lower tissue
density such as the lung parenchyma appears black. This does not
change the HU values of the voxels (3-dimensional pixels) in the
image, just their presentation for visual inspection.
The visual interpretation of thoracic CT is based upon the
appearance of the secondary pulmonary lobule. This structure is a
fundamental subunit of the lung consisting of a central airway and
pulmonary artery, parenchyma, and then surrounding interstitium
with the lymphatics and pulmonary veins (Fig. 286-5).

Processes affecting the small airways such as respiratory
bronchiolitis may appear as centrilobular nodules. Parenchymal
diseases such as emphysema may begin by effacing the centroid of
the lobule (CLE: centrilobular emphysema), the periphery of the
lobule (PSE: paraseptal emphysema), or diffusely across the lobule
(PLE: panlobular emphysema). Pathology of the lymphatics or
interstitium (interstitial lung disease, ILD) results in beading and/or
thickening of the interlobular septa. Examples of many of these
processes are provided in Chaps. 292 and 293.

The diagnostic information provided by the appearance of the
secondary pulmonary lobule is further augmented by the distribution
of these patterns of injury across the lung. Whereas CLE tends to
first appear in the upper lung zones, PLE has a predilection to be
basilar predominant. Interstitial thickening in the apices is more likely
to be nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis (NSIP) while a basal and
dependent predominant distribution of that same process is more
consistent with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF).
Finally, morphology of the central airways and vessels can be
used to diagnose disease and estimate its severity. Bronchiectatic
dilation of the airways may be cylindrical and predominantly in the
lower lobes as is seen in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), cystic dilation in the upper lobes (cystic fibrosis), or there
may be a focal nonspecific dilation of an airway due to prior infection.
Pathologic dilation of the airways may also be due to disease of the
surrounding parenchyma. Because of the mechanical
interdependence of the bronchial tree and parenchyma, conditions
that reduce lung compliance may result in traction bronchiectasis.
This may be a local process or more diffuse depending on the
distribution of the underlying parenchymal disease, and likely
provides further insight into disease severity.
The caliber of the central pulmonary arterial (PA) trunk proximal
to its first bifurcation is directly related to pulmonary arterial pressure.
A measure of >3 cm is suggestive of the presence of elevated
pulmonary vascular pressures and more recent studies have
demonstrated that an increased ratio of the PA diameter to the
diameter of the adjacent aorta (PA/A) provides a metric of disease
severity and in the case of chronic respiratory diseases such as
COPD is prognostic for both acute respiratory exacerbations and
death. Assessment of the intraparenchymal pulmonary vasculature
is typically augmented through the intravenous infusion or bolus of
iodinated contrast. This bolus and subsequent image acquisition
may be timed to visualize passage of contrast through the pulmonary
arteries to enable detection of thromboembolic disease, which
appears as dark filling voids in otherwise bright white vessels.
It must be noted that the acquisition of CXRs and thoracic CT
scans involves exposing the patient to ionizing radiation. Several
studies have estimated the excess numbers of cancer due to CT
scanning and extensive efforts have been made by both CT
manufacturers and clinicians to reduce the radiation dose to the
lowest possible amount that does not jeopardize image quality and
interpretability.

■ MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MRI is based upon the behavior of protons in a magnetic field. A
strong magnetic field is applied to align the protons and then a pulse
of radiofrequency current is then applied to the subject. This perturbs
the protons and the speed at which they subsequently realign differs
based upon the properties of the tissues within the region of interest.
While this technique provides exquisite imaging data for the chest
wall or solid organs such as the brain or heart, the abundance of air
in the lung creates an artifact that impairs direct assessment of the
parenchyma. For this reason, MRI of the lung leverages intravenous
contrast agents such as gadolinium and is increasingly exploring the
use of inhaled agents such as hyperpolarized noble gas. These
respective agents enable in vivo assessments of organ perfusion
and detailed measures of the morphology of the distal airspaces. An
example of noble gas–enhanced MRI is shown in Fig. 286-6. The
inhaled agent is 3He and because it is proton rich, it can be used to
examine lung ventilation visually and objectively. Regions of the lung
that are poorly ventilated due to disease of the airways or distal
airspaces have low concentrations of 3He and appear as dark
regions in an otherwise bright blue organ.

While an MRI may have a longer acquisition time than CT, and
the geometry of the equipment often leads to a sense of
claustrophobia, it does not involve the administration of ionizing
radiation. This makes it a modality of choice in the pediatric
population or clinical situations where repeated assessments are
required.

■ POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
PET generates an image based upon the aggregation of
radiolabeled tracers. The most common agent used for these
purposes is [18F]-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG). This radiolabeled
glucose analogue is administered intravenously and is taken up by
cells in direct proportion to their metabolic activity. In the clinical
setting, it is most commonly used for the discrimination of benign
and malignant lung nodules, as well as lung cancer staging. Given
the relatively low resolution of PET, co-registration with CT is
common and the aligned imaging modalities allow the reader to
determine the structural source of heightened metabolic activity.
There is increasing interest in the use of PET imaging in the
biomedical community. These applications are largely still confined
to research but advances in areas such as in vivo assessments of
vascular biology in acute and chronic disease have been impressive.
■ ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE/DEEP LEARNING
The final aspect to thoracic imaging that must be discussed is the
growing field of artificial intelligence and deep learning applied to
image analysis. Classic machine learning approaches to medical
image interpretation involve the development of advanced algorithms
to detect structures of interest, segment their boundaries, and then
extract metrics related to size, shape, texture, etc. The massive
increase in processing capacity afforded by graphical processing
units (GPUs), the increasing availability of large amounts of data,
and the wide dissemination of open-source software libraries
allowing developers to create powerful work environments has led to
explosive growth in the utilization of deep learning for image
analytics. Some of the first medical applications of deep learning
were in the field of dermatology and, more recently, this advanced
form of pattern recognition has been reported to excel at the
discrimination of benign and malignant lung nodules in thoracic CT
scan. The breadth of application of these tools continues to expand
to include image navigation and feature detection, biomarker
development, and direct prediction of clinical outcomes. An example
of deep learning–enabled segmentation of the heart and pulmonary
vasculature from noncontrast enhanced noncardiac gated CT scan is
shown in Fig. 286-7.

TRANSTHORACIC NEEDLE ASPIRATION
Radiologically guided needle biopsy has served as a long-standing
mechanism for evaluation of parenchymal lung lesions, both
malignant and infectious. In the setting of published guidelines
recommending low-dose screening CT scan for lung malignancy in
high-risk patients and with evolving guidelines for monitoring and
assessment of incidental lung lesions arising in this setting,
radiologically guided sampling of lung lesions has become an
increasingly important mechanism to address parenchymal lung
abnormalities concerning for cancer. Moreover, as novel immune
modulators and biologic agents are increasingly utilized for the
management of systemic disease and transplantation, effective
interventions are becoming progressively more important in
assessing for potential pulmonary infections arising as complications
of immune suppression. Transthoracic needle aspiration (TTNA)
remains one important arm in the assessment of these pulmonary
complications.
TTNA can be accomplished with a variety of complementary
imaging mechanisms, including under fluoroscopic, CT, ultrasound,
or MRI guidance. CT is currently the most common imaging modality
used to assess parenchymal lung lesions, with sensitivity and
specificity reported to be >90%. Sensitivity of CT-guided TTNA is
increased in more peripheral lesions. Transthoracic ultrasound has
the advantages of a low complication rate in the setting of fine
needle aspiration (FNA) and portability, allowing for more logistical
simplicity in the setting of lung lesion assessment. In a prospective
study of ultrasound-guided percutaneous FNA compared with CTguided FNA, diagnostic rates were comparable between the two
groups, with shorter procedure time associated with ultrasound
guidance, numerical suggestion of decreased complication rate
using ultrasound guidance, and lower costs associated with
ultrasound guidance. Use of elastography to better characterize lung
lesions has also been proposed in the context of ultrasound, though
additional diagnostic yield has not yet been proven. Color Doppler
ultrasonographic imaging has been demonstrated to have a high
sensitivity and specificity and a low complication rate in another
study. Electromagnetic guidance, unlike CT imaging, can be used in
combination with endobronchial ultrasound and or navigational
bronchoscopy in the operative setting, theoretically allowing for a
multimodal approach that could increase diagnostic yield and allow
for a combined staging procedure. Electromagnetic TTNA alone has
demonstrated an 83% diagnostic yield in a pilot study, with an
increase to 87% when combined with navigational bronchoscopy.
Conflicting data are available regarding the diagnostic superiority of
TTNA compared with alternative biopsy modalities such as
endobronchial ultrasound for diagnosis of lung lesions, and results
may depend on center experience.
Transthoracic sampling can be obtained using FNA or core
needle biopsy. In one retrospective study, FNA was found to have an
inferior diagnostic rate, compared with core needle sampling, as well
as lower specificity. In this study, a method involving two FNA passes
was compared to core needle sampling with six cores obtained from
a single pass. No significant differences in complication rates were
noted. In another retrospective study, in which procedure was
determined by operator preferences, core needle aspirate samples
were more likely to provide sufficient material for molecular testing
than FNA. A systematic review of these techniques concluded that
insufficient evidence was available to support a difference between
FNA and core needle biopsy in diagnostic efficiency, though core
needle biopsy may be more specific in diagnosing benign lung
lesions. Given the negative predictive value estimate of 70%,
negative results from TTNA are less reliable than positive results and
should not be considered definitive to eliminate the concern for
malignancy. Further assessment is needed to directly compare
imaging modalities for TTNA guidance and to compare TTNA with
other diagnostic modalities to determine the optimal choice of
procedure in particular settings. Choice of procedure should be
considered in the context of the size and location of the lesion, the
experience of the center and operator, and patient-specific factors.
In regards to the safety of TTNA, in a retrospective study from
2015, the presence of mild to moderate pulmonary hypertension in
patients did not increase complication rates in the setting of TTNA.
The complication rates noted in this report were substantial,
however, with hemorrhage occurring in one-third to one-quarter of
patients, and pneumothorax in 17–28%. The majority of
pneumothoraces did not require chest tube placement. Other
complications included hemoptysis and hemothorax, though these
were uncommon. These complication rates are consistent with those
reported in other studies. In a meta-analysis of complication rates of
CT-guided TTNA, complication rates were higher with core needle
aspirates than FNA (38.8% [95% CI 34.3–43.5%] vs 24% [95% CI
18.2–30.8%]). The majority of these complications were minor. Risk
factors for complications with FNA included smaller nodule diameter,
larger needle diameter, and increased traversed lung parenchyma.
No clear risk factors were noted for complications after core needle
biopsies in this publication. More generally, the risks of TTNA
increase for more centrally located lesions and those residing in
close proximity to intrathoracic vasculature.
Despite the outstanding questions regarding the optimal
approach for TTNA, this modality has been shown to be effective in
cancer diagnosis in the thorax. Adenocarcinoma has become the
most prevalent parenchymal lung malignancy in reported studies,
and also the most common malignant diagnosis found on TTNA of
the lung. TTNA can also be effective in diagnosing less common
tumors of the lung, both malignant and benign, including squamous
and small cell carcinomas, lymphomas, and others, as well as in
assessing tumors of the mediastinum. The diagnostic utility of TTNA
is consistent across solid, subsolid, and partially calcified lung
nodules. Immunocytochemistry markers can be utilized in TTNA
samples to assist with diagnosis, prognosis, and prediction of
response to therapy, and samples should be preserved whenever
possible to allow for these studies, if needed. RNA extraction has
also proven feasible in the setting of a single FNA sample, which
could be instrumental in gene expression profiling, though this has
thus far only been successfully accomplished in a research context.
The utility of TTNA in diagnosing pulmonary infections is variable
in published literature. Some publications have reported that TTNA
establishes a diagnosis of infection in 60–70% of cases, with a
particularly high yield in the setting of Aspergillus infections. TTNA
has also been shown to be particularly effective in the diagnosis of
pulmonary tuberculosis, though a wide variety of infections have
been diagnosed using this method. The presence of necrosis in lung
lesions makes establishing an infectious diagnosis more likely using
TTNA. Numerous staining techniques are available to assist with
infectious diagnoses, and immunohistochemistry can also aid in the
diagnosis of infection. Cytology should be correlated with
histopathology and culture results, when available. Metagenomics
using next-generation sequencing for detection of infection is
evolving but requires further study. TTNA has also been useful in
identifying granulomatous inflammation, which can provide
supportive evidence of a granulomatous parenchymal lung disease
in the appropriate clinical setting.
In summary, TTNA is an important element of diagnostic
algorithms in the setting of lung nodules and masses, particularly
when concern for malignancy is not high enough to warrant
immediate excision, when the patient is not a surgical candidate, or
the lesion or disease is not amenable to surgical resection. Further
study is needed, however, to better understand the role of TTNA and
other diagnostic modalities in the evaluation of parenchymal lung
lesions.

MISCELLANEOUS TESTING
■ SPUTUM TESTING
Sputum microscopy and culture are commonly utilized to diagnose
respiratory tract infections and identify the causative organisms. In
patients with productive cough the sampling is simple and
noninvasive, however, subject to patient technique and the potential
for oropharyngeal and/or upper respiratory tract contamination. In
those who are not expectorating, sputum induction can be
considered using provocative nebulization with saline. Numerous
studies have attempted to define criteria for reliability and
reproducibility of sputum samples. The majority include quantification
of number of epithelial cells and white blood cells per low power
field, and many assess the ratio of the two for adequacy of sampling.
None has been confirmed as superior in establishing the reliability of
sampling to reflect lower respiratory tract growth. The quality of the
sputum sample directly impacts the diagnostic reliability in the setting
of bacterial pneumonia. Growth of Mycobaterium tuberculosis,
Legionella, or pneumocystis should raise concern for infection, even
in the setting of a poor sample. Endotracheal aspirates have not
been demonstrated to be clearly superior to expectorated sputum in
terms of diagnostic reliability, but such sampling may be required if
spontaneous coughing is nonproductive and induced sputum is not
feasible or successful.

As in the context of infection, sputum cytologic analysis has been
utilized to assist in the diagnosis of malignancy, mainly because it
can be obtained noninvasively. While sputum cytology demonstrating
malignant cells is highly specific for a diagnosis of lung malignancy,
its sensitivity has been reported at <40%. A systematic review of
screening methods demonstrated no added benefit from sputum
cytology when combined with CXR to screen for lung cancer.
Advanced molecular techniques such as polymerase chain reaction,
DNA methylation markers, micro-RNA assessment, and tumorrelated protein analysis have been proposed in sputum assessment
for diagnostic purposes and risk stratification. At present, however,
sputum cytology is recommended only when more invasive
techniques cannot be pursued, such as in patients with prohibitive
comorbidities or in resource-limited settings.
■ EXHALED BREATH CONDENSATE
Exhaled breath condensate includes gaseous, liquid, and watersoluble components, with numerous biomarker types and collection
system varieties developed over time. Validation standards for many
components are still being determined. Exhaled nitric oxide is the
most highly validated of the biomarkers identified in exhaled breath
condensate. The fraction of exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) has been
demonstrated in higher concentrations in exhaled breath condensate
of patients with asthma than in healthy individuals, and has been
shown in some studies to correlate with the presence of eosinophils
in the sputum and blood and with response to inhaled
corticosteroids, though data are conflicting. For example, in a
systematic review and meta-analysis, FeNO elevation increased the
odds of having asthma in both children above the age of 5 years and
adults. In another systematic review of FeNO utilization in the
management of adults with asthma, the assessment was helpful in
the management of severe exacerbations but had no significant
impact on overall exacerbations or inhaled corticosteroid use.
Moreover, evidence suggests that tailoring of asthma therapy based
on sputum eosinophil levels was effective in decreasing asthma
exacerbations, but tailoring of therapy based on FeNO was not
beneficial in improving outcomes, and insufficient evidence was
observed to advocate the use of either sputum analysis or FeNO in
clinical practice. FeNO has also been shown to be influenced by
ethnicity, and appropriate reference standards for different ethnic
groups have yet to be established. While FeNO has been proposed
as a potential clinical guide to management, its use has not been
incorporated into all guideline recommendations, and it has not been
formally approved for clinical use.
■ SWEAT TESTING
Assessment of chloride concentration in sweat using pilocarpine
iontopheresis, or sweat testing, remains a key element in the
diagnostic framework of cystic fibrosis (CF). This method utilizes
pilocarpine to stimulate sweat production. As patients with CF suffer
from alterations to the sodium chloride ion channel, measurement of
electrolytes in their secretions such as sweat reveals elevated
chloride concentrations, amongst other abnormalities. This testing
has been considered the gold standard in the diagnosis of CF due to
its functional nature, its relative noninvasiveness, the establishment
of validated standards for its performance, and its ability to
discriminate between healthy individuals and those with CF at a
chloride concentration of ≥60 mmol/L. The likelihood of a diagnosis
of CF at a concentration of <40 mmol/L has been observed to be
low, and an indeterminate range was defined as 40–59 mmol/L,
which could be consistent with the disease if genetic and clinical
manifestations were supportive.
While functional testing such as sweat chloride testing remains
an essential component of diagnostic algorithms in CF, the evolution
of genetic analysis has led to identification of an extensive array of
genetic mutations associated with varied phenotypic impacts in this
disease. In this context, the indeterminate range of chloride
concentrations of 40–59 mmol/L on sweat test analysis was found to
inadequately identify milder or more heterogenous forms of the
disease associated with newly identified genetic mutations. As a
result, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation provided updated guidance for
the interpretation of sweat test results, with a decreased lower
threshold to define an intermediate range of chloride concentration
(changed from 40–50 mmol/L to 30–50 mmol/L), which could be
consistent with the diagnosis of CF in the appropriate genetic and
clinical context. In a subsequent analysis, utilization of the new
guidance was found to enhance the probability of identifying patients
with CF without increasing the false-positive diagnosis rate in the
population. Sweat testing is a critical component of the CF diagnostic
algorithm but should be interpreted in the context of clinical
manifestations of disease and correlated with genetic testing in those
suspected of the diagnosis.
■ ALLERGY TESTING
Allergy testing is often considered in the assessment of
environmental exposures, including seasonal allergens, food
allergens, and drug allergens. In the case of drug allergens in
particular, drug reactions are often reported based on remote history
and are often unconfirmed. The hesitancy to re-expose patients with
an unconfirmed drug allergy can lead to limited options for treatment,
to delay in treatment, and to utilization of treatments with more
extended spectrum, potentially influencing the resistance patterns of
these agents. Drug reactions can be mediated by IgE (immediate
type reactions, type I), IgG or IgM (type II), immune complex
reactions (type III), and delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions
mediated by cellular immune mechanisms (type IV).
Skin testing, including patch testing and/or delayed intradermal
testing, is available to test exposure to particular allergens and
determine reactivity. These tests have been shown to aid in clinical
phenotyping of type I reactions and potentially in type IV reactions,
though their role in type IV assessment remains more controversial.
In the context of suspected type I reactions, patch testing is more
cost effective and may be as effective as intradermal testing in
identifying potential causative agents. The negative predictive value
of intradermal skin testing in assessing for IgE-mediated drug
allergies is high; however, the high sensitivity of this testing limits its
specificity, and results must be interpreted in the context of the
pretest probability and the clinical experience of the patient. Skin
tests have also been demonstrated to assist in identifying the
causative agent in type IV reactions and to assess cross-reactivity
between structurally related drugs. Intradermal testing may be more
sensitive than patch testing to assess for type IV drug reactions.
Though some debate continues regarding a mandatory role for skin
testing in the assessment of potential drug allergies, drug
provocation testing or rechallenge is generally regarded as safe in
low-risk individuals with history of urticaria or immediate rash,
whereas skin testing has been proposed as a preliminary
assessment in higher-risk individuals with a history of two or more
reactions, angioedema, or anaphylaxis, prior to consideration of drug
provocation testing.

